From the New York Times, I'm Natalie
Kitrov. This is the daily.
[Music]
For months, President Trump has been
ratcheting up the pressure on Venezuela
with increasingly aggressive military
actions that the administration claims
are about targeting drug traffickers.
But behind the scenes, some US officials
are pushing toward a very different
goal, regime change.
Today, my colleague Anatoli Kman
explains the battle being waged within
the White House over whether to topple
the government of Nicholas Maduro.
It's Thursday, October 23rd.
[Music]
Anatoli, welcome back to the Americas.
You're in your old stomping ground in
Caracus.
>> That's right. Yeah. It's strange to be
back. Yeah. After eight years of
reporting from here.
>> Just tell me how many times over the
course of your career as a foreign
correspondent, you've been in Venezuela
awaiting the theoretical end of this
long-standing regime now led by Maduro.
>> Oh god. Um, I arrived in the country
just a few weeks after Maduro took power
in 2013.
And I think I've seen at least six
times, six moments when it looked like
his government might collapse. And
>> you know, I've I've seen it all. It was
mass protest, you know, millions of
people in the streets. It was, you know,
military coups. It was economic chaos,
you know, the deepest reception in the
world outside of war zone in modern
history. There was a national blackout
for a week, then it just looked like the
entire country might collapse. There was
a stone election last year and it's
still the same government in power. But
what we haven't had before is the
spectra of military action and military
action from the most powerful country on
earth. So a lot of people here believe
that this time it it could be different.
>> Okay, let's get into this moment that
we're in right now. There have been so
many boats that have been bombed in the
Caribbean Sea at this point by the Trump
administration that it's been hard to
keep it straight. We've seen more than
two dozen people killed. What's the
latest on the ground of Venezuela?
>> So, so far the US has destroyed seven
boats of Venezuelan coast, killing about
30 people. It has amassed a substantial
military force in the Caribbean. And
last week, the Trump administration has
authorized the CIA to conduct covert
operations inside Venezuela. And Trump
has explicitly said that he's
considering launching operations on
Venezuelan land.
>> Basically, the threat of military boots
on the ground,
>> basically meaning the involvements of US
servicemen, US operatives in violent
actions inside Venezuela. But it's the
sense of siege that it has created in
Venezuela, I think. and the expectation
that this is just the first phase of a
prolonged military campaign against the
Maduro government.
>> You said that the expectation is that
this is the first phase of what we're
seeing. So what's the next phase? Like
what's the sense of what the eventual
endgame is here?
>> So it's hard to know what is legitimate
planning for next military steps and and
what is part of psychological warfare.
We have to keep in mind that part of
administration's
strategy I suppose is to create this
atmosphere and fear and and tension and
paranoia among the government of
Nicholas Maduro and create a sort of
split in his power structure. But no
matter who you speak to here in
Venezuela, whether it's a street seller,
business people, officials in Maduro
government, it's clear to everyone that
the final goal is to topple Maduro. And
this doveetales with what my colleagues
in Washington hearing from the sources
that they are talking to that's the
endgame of this pressure campaign is to
bring a different government in power in
Venezuela.
>> Right. Ending a regime that the US has
opposed for a very long time. Just
explain why that's been the case.
>> So the standoff goes back to the time of
Maduro's predecessor and man Ugo Chavez.
He was a left-wing nationalist leader
who became increasingly undemocratic.
>> Hugo Chavez has packed the Supreme Court
and the army with his supporters and
introduced a new penal code that
criminalizes disscent.
>> This movements became increasingly
antagonistic towards the US
>> after Venezuela forced the US ambassador
out of the country.
The United States is expelling its
ambassador
>> and used the country's oil wealth to
challenge US dominance in the region.
>> George W. Bush,
you are a donkey, Mr. Bush.
>> Chavez struck new alliances with US
adversaries.
>> Iranian President Muhammad Ahmed is
visiting Venezuela.
>> Cha said that he's searching for a
strategic relationship with Russia. with
China, with Russia, with Iran. He
repressed pro-American opposition
parties. And over time, the US has
responded with gradual sanctions which
were aimed at creating conditions for
the opposition to win in a democratic
way and and change the course.
But then
>> a new day is coming in Latin America.
It's coming. This all changes during
Trump's first term in power.
>> The people of Venezuela are standing for
freedom and democracy, and the United
States of America is standing right by
their side.
>> Trump starting a so-called maximum
pressure campaign to drive Maduro from
power.
>> We have many options for Venezuela. This
is our neighbor. this is, you know,
we're all over the world and we have
troops all over the world in places that
are very, very far away.
>> So, he recognized the country's
opposition leader as the legitimate
president of the country. He bans
Venezuelan oil from the US. He makes it
extremely difficult for Venezuelan
governments to make any financial
transactions and precipitating an
economic crisis in the country which
made life very difficult for ordinary
people which led Maduro to dig further
in to rely more on repression to deepen
his alliances with China and Russia to
hold on to power.
>> Right? The push to ou Maduro just did
not work. And the question for a long
time now has been how far is the US
willing to go to get rid of Maduro. For
the Trump administration now it seems as
though that threshold is changing. They
seem much more willing to do something
that they weren't back in 2019 which is
use military force. And that's why
you're saying that things seem so much
different in this moment.
>> That's right. What was missing in the
past was the threats of US military
action.
>> And so how did we get here to the point
where now the threat of military force
is very much on the table?
>> So from a Venezuelan side, last year
was a point of no return for Venezuelan
democracy because Maduro went from
making it very difficult for the
opposition to campaign to outright
making up numbers. But it was a
presidential election last year. Huge
outswell of support for the opposition
led by Maria Kina Machado
[Applause]
>> and her candidates get 70% of the vote
and her activists are able to provide
proof of those numbers are able to
provide evidence of real election
results.
This political campaign organized by
Maria Kurina Machado was the reason she
received Nobel Peace Prize. But Magdura
ignores them, produces completely
different results
and uses repression to stay in power.
basically challenging the opposition,
the world to do anything about them.
>> And that's the state of play basically,
right? When Trump comes into office in
January, Maduro has held on to power
even though at this point the whole
world basically believes that he has
stolen this election. So what does Trump
do?
>> So initially he tries negotiating with
Maduro. He sends his envoy to Karacas to
start working on a deal that would in
effect deliver all of Pinsola's natural
resources to the US and keep Madur in
power at least for the time being.
>> Did you say deliver all the natural
resources of Venezuela to the US?
>> That's right, Natalie. The reporting
that we have shows that it was arguably
the most farreaching attempt at resource
diplomacy of Trump's Tman power. It's
involved shipping all of Venezuelan oil
to the United States. It involved
opening up all of Venezuela's oil fields
and mines to US companies. And very
importantly, it involved Maduro
basically breaking off the existing
contracts with Chinese, Russian, and
Iranian companies. Basically sabotaging
his existing alliances in order to
rebuild his relationship with the United
States. That would essentially be
Venezuela doing a complete 180 on its
foreign policy and seeding control over
its most valuable resources to the US.
Can you just explain why Maduro and his
government would agree to that?
>> The biggest reason is survival in return
for these economic riches. Maduro would
stay in power or at the very least his
movements would be able to stay in power
or to be able to contest elections in
the future. So it created an offramp for
Maduro and his top officials.
>> This does seem like exactly the kind of
transactional extractive deal that Trump
has favored in the past. You know, pay
me and we'll help you out. So I assume
that this seems like a pretty good
offer.
>> That's right. Early this year, the
momentum was definitely heading towards
a deal.
Venezuela started accepting deportation
flights from United States. It started
releasing Americans held in Venezuela
and it seemed like we are cruising
towards normalization of relations.
But then Trump Secretary of State Marco
Rubio takes center stage and everything
changes.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
Anatoli, you told us this deal seemed
like a go, but then Secretary of State
Marco Rubio took control. So, how did
Rubio get in the middle of these
negotiations? Exactly.
>> So, he starts undermining it behind the
scene. First, in late March, he exerts
pressure to cancel permits for US
companies operating in Venezuela. He
scraps these licenses, dealing a major
blow to to Venezuelan economy. And then
in June, Rubio uses his connections in
the South Florida Republican Party to
convince Trump that CubanAmerican
congressman from South Florida will not
support his big spending bill if a deal
with Maduro goes forward.
>> The BBB, the big beautiful bill.
>> Correct. The big beautiful bill.
>> It's interesting. While one side of the
Trump administration is trying to
negotiate this deal with Maduro, here
you have Marco Rubio actively
undermining the strategy at every turn.
Why? That's right. For Rubio, it's
personal. Marco Rubio is a son of Cuban
immigrants who became part of this large
community of Cubanameans in South
Florida who view Latin America through
the prism of Cuban influence in the
region. And they see getting rid of
Maduro as a crucial step towards ending
dictatorship in the country that they
left in the country that their parents
or grandparents have left. And
throughout his political career, Rubio
has rejected negotiations with Chavez,
with Maduro. And for him, the main goal
has always been to see Maduro gone. And
this time Rubio has a plan that he can
present as the moral imperative.
>> And so what is the plan that he
presents?
>> He is supporting Maria Karina Machado,
the opposition politician who won
elections in Venezuela last year. In the
view of Marco Rubio and his supporters,
they are working to restore democracy in
Venezuela and to put legitimate
presidents in power. But throughout
Trump's terms, it's been very clear that
the issues of democracy and human rights
do not carry much cas.
So Rubio had to look for another weapon.
He needed to present something to Trump
that would catch his ear and would
outweigh the economic benefits of
working with Maduro. And he found the
answer in drugs.
Trump has, you know, spoke repeatedly
about the drug epidemic, you know, the
fentinel crisis in the US. He has
threats in Mexican cartels. He has
threats in military actions against
cartels in Mexico. So, Marco Rubio
changes tack.
>> Maduro, although they call him a
dictator cuz he is and all that, he's
not a government official. What he is is
the head of a drug trafficking logistics
organization, a cartel, the cartel of
the Suns. He starts to frame Venezuelan
governments as a drug cartel.
>> And I've seen a lot of this reporting
and it's fake reporting and I'll tell
you why. It says that somehow Venezuela
is not involved in the drug trade
because the UN says they're not involved
in the I don't the UN I don't care what
the UN says. The UN doesn't know what
they're talking about.
>> He flips the Venezuelan issue from being
a struggle over democracy and human
rights towards it being a struggle
against drugs. Nicholas Maduro is an
indicted drug trafficker in the United
States and he's a fugitive of American
justice.
>> He makes Maduro government part of
America's war against drugs and this
leads to an escalation. Rubio designates
basically Maduro's entire regime as a
narco terrorist cartel and you know he
supports sending all this military
hardware into the region to threaten
Maduro and ultimately this leads to the
strikes on the boats of alleged drug
traffickers of Venezuela's coast
>> and we've covered this on this show you
know it's still the case that the Trump
administration has not actually
presented any strong evidence that
Maduro is a cartel leader. That's not
something the intelligence agencies have
agreed with. You're saying that Rubio
goes forward with this strategy anyway.
>> That's right, Natalie. It is accepted
that some cocaine ships through
Venezuela, that Venezuela is the
location for drug smuggling, but there
has not been any convincing evidence
that this is a hierarchical organized
endeavor from the top levels of
Venezuelan government. But Rubio knows
that this is a compelling political
narrative,
>> right?
>> And at the same time, Mario Karina
Machado is pitching an economic
reconstruction plan which in spirit is
very similar to the deal that Maduro has
been negotiating with Trump earlier this
year. So in effect, Rubio is promising
to Trump that he can kill two birds with
one stone. he can topple Maduro and
proclaim a victory in his fight against
drugs and at the same time obtain the
same economic deals that Maduro is
offering him in return for staying in
power.
>> And is that actually true that Maria
Karina Machado would give up the same
things that Maduro is offering like
Trump could just get the economic deal
he wants and ou Maduro at the same time?
So, Maria Karina has held very
consistent views throughout her
political career and she is a firm
believer in American style free market
economy. She is a firm supporter of
American businesses, American economic
interest and she was willing to tailor
her message in order to keep Trump on
her side. After Trump came to power, she
has stopped talking about the plight of
Venezuelan migrants, which was major
elements of her election campaign. She
has stayed largely silenced when Trump
sent hundreds of Venezuelans to an
Salvadorian prison without any due
process. and she has unequivocably
supported Trump's campaign against drug
smuggling in Venezuela without
mentioning the fact that some of her
countrymen are being killed at high seas
without any evidence of due process.
>> So Machado it sounds like is not being a
purist in an effort to not alienate the
Trump administration because above all
else what she wants is political change
in her country. I'm wondering how
regular Venezuelans view her pitch,
Rubio's pitch for US intervention to
achieve that goal. They obviously
overwhelmingly voted against Maduro as
you said, but do they agree with the
argument that getting Maduro out is
worth the potential upheaval of US
military action in their country?
>> This is a crucial question. Natalie
Machado has presented her overwhelming
victory in last year's election as a
mandate for change at any cost. Whether
Venezuelans agree has been difficult to
gauge because of the scale of repression
in the country. But the polling that I
have seen shows that only a minority of
Venezuelans support military
intervention in Venezuela.
Overwhelmingly, Venezuelans support
political change. They want Maduro gone
and they want international community to
help them achieve that change. But a
minority believe that a military
intervention would be a justified cause
to achieve that goal.
>> But despite the fact that intervention
doesn't necessarily have broad-based
support in Venezuela, we are at what
feels like the precipice of something.
And I'm just wondering if you can lay
out what the paths forward are now. Is
the diplomatic route that leaves Maduro
in power still even an option? Have we
moved so far in the other direction that
it's just not on the table anymore?
>> So diplomacy is off the table for now.
Trump has told his envoy to basically
cut off contacts with Maduro for the
time being and appears to have given
Rubio green light to to achieve results
through military pressure. and
supporters of negotiation approach. They
acknowledge that they lost this battle.
They acknowledge that they have been
outplayed, outmaneuvered by Rubio at
this stage. But they don't believe that
this is the end. They point to Trump's
behavior
towards Ukraine where he has repeatedly
changed his positions since returning to
power. So just because negotiations are
off the table now, that does not mean
that we'll be off the table forever. And
Rubio's opponents, they biding their
time for Rubio to make a mistake, for
him to fail to produce clear results in
a in a span of next several months in
order for them to then redouble their
pitch of economic balances that could be
had in a short term straight away under
the current government in Venezuela. On
the side of those who are advocating
intervention, it does seem as though a
lot of people in that camp may be hoping
for, fantasizing about a kind of
painless surgical extraction of Maduro
from Venezuela, you know, by Marines or
or whoever, and then the arrival of a
new government led by Machado that
everybody wants that functions smoothly.
But Anatoli, you know this better than
me. The US has a long history of this
kind of intervention in Latin America.
Has it ever worked that way? Seamless,
smooth.
>> I mean, history shows that only rarely
do military interventions produce the
kind of sustained democracy that Machado
is advocating for. There's not much
track record for this sort of outcome.
Machado believes that the country
overwhelmingly supports her and would
just welcome her with open arms to just,
you know, for her candidates to assume
the presidency and take over armed
forces, state bureaucracy, state
infrastructure and just usher this new
era of democracy, prosperity. But
there's all sorts of outcome that are
likely even more likely to to occur.
Maduro could lose power but be replaced
by someone even more hardlined within
his own coalition but someone even more
oppressive and someone more antagonistic
towards the United States. You know the
power vacuum could create all sorts of
chaos perhaps not necessarily in in
Karacas but in the in the periphery of a
country areas where you have all sorts
of armed groups ranging from criminal
gangs to Colombian insurgents. you know,
we we could see the violence that this
could create could unleash a whole new
wave of migration towards Colombia, the
neighboring country to Venezuela, which
could destabilize that country further.
You know, the the military interventions
could have all sorts of unexpected
lasting outcomes that go far beyond the
sort of clean, elegant transition to
democracy under a democratically elected
government.
>> Yeah. And one of those outcomes, right,
is that you could end up destabilizing
this country and potentially spurring a
new wave of migration, which is exactly
what this administration wants to avoid.
I mean, if you end up creating all this
instability that could potentially
spread to neighboring countries, that's
obviously not in the US interest either.
And it's also, by the way, the opposite
of the America first agenda that Trump
campaigned on.
>> No. And the way this campaign is
unfolding so far gives indications of
the risks ahead. You know the way the
strikes against boats seems to be
spreading to countries neighboring
Venezuela. Colombian president has
accused us of of murdering a Colombian
fisherman. Trump has responded by
cutting off aids and threatening
Colombian governments. So this has
already escalated beyond the sort of
narrow surgical approach towards
removing Maduro and we are just in the
beginning. So I think you know the risk
of plunging the region into uncharted
territory are are very great and and
this is the line that Maduro's
governments and his allies in Washington
have exploited. you know, they present
themselves as this bastion of stability
and relatives peace against the anarchy
and chaos that Machado is about to
unleash on the country.
>> Just to pull back to take a longer view
of all of this, if if the Trump
administration goes through with this,
it wouldn't just be right a return to an
older, more aggressive approach to the
Americas, a more aggressive foreign
policy. In many ways, it would be a test
of how far the US can push the limits of
that policy in 2025. The latest phase of
all of this started, as you said, with
bombing boats in international waters
and treating alleged criminals as if
they're enemy combatants in a war, which
many experts see as a complete violation
of international law. So, I'm wondering
how you are thinking about the larger
stakes of what we're seeing play out
here.
>> What worries me the most here, Natalie,
is the potential precedent that it sets.
To me, this is beyond Venezuela, a
country that I know and care deeply
about. This is beyond Latin America.
This is about what happens when the most
powerful country on earth, chooses to
designate a sovereign government. Yes. a
repressive, illegitimate, but a
government of a sovereign nation, a
criminal organization, a terrorist
group, and then deal with it in any
matter that it sees fits. It becomes a
precedent for how the US deals with
other nations around the world. To me,
there's a risk of this conflict given
rise to to something larger. Hm.
>> And of course, you could argue that what
we see in Minnesota is just a
continuation of years, perhaps decades
of US interventionism. You know, the the
drone strikes on presumed terrorists in
the Middle East, at least since the time
of Barack Obama with very little legal
oversight. Of course, it has sent
alleged terrorists to Guatana Bay. But I
think what we see in Venezuela is a
massive escalation of a trend, right?
Where you
see perhaps in broad daylight the
killing of people accused of certain
crime without the least amount of
evidence or due process presents it. And
the risk that many legal experts see is
that this becomes the new normal. that
this will become the way US and perhaps
other global powers treat the
adversaries by designating sovereign
nations as criminals and then treating
them as such.
[Music]
>> Anatoli, thank you.
>> Thank you for having me as always.
On Wednesday, Defense Secretary Pete
Hgsith said that the military had
attacked a boat in the Eastern Pacific
Ocean for the first time, an expansion
of the attacks the administration has
been carrying out on vessels in the
Caribbean.
Hegath said in a social media post that
the strike killed two people on the
boat, which he said was carrying drugs.
It was the eighth known boat attack
since September, bringing the officially
acknowledged death toll of the strikes
to 34.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
Here's what else you should know today.
On Wednesday, President Trump announced
that he was imposing new sanctions on
Russia for the first time in his second
term, underscoring his frustration with
President Vladimir Putin after a plan
for the two leaders to meet fell apart.
Trump made his irritation with Putin
clear on Wednesday, saying his
conversations with the Russian leader
were always good, but never went
anywhere. The sanctions targeted
Russia's two largest oil companies, and
they're some of the most significant
measures that the US has taken against
the Russian energy sector since the
beginning of the war in Ukraine.
And President Trump acknowledged on
Wednesday that he was having the entire
East Wing demolished to make way for his
90,000 square ft ballroom, an expansion
of a project that is remaking the
profile of one of the nation's most
iconic buildings.
Trump also said the ballroom would cost
300 million, hundred million more than
the original cost estimate given less
than 3 months ago. The president has
said that he's raising tens of millions
of dollars in private donations to fund
the construction, sparking concerns from
ethics experts who warn that it may just
be another way for the wealthy to buy
access to the president.
[Music]
Today's episode was produced by Carlos
Prito and Michael Simon Johnson. It was
edited by MJ Davis Lynn and Paige Cowat.
Contains music by Diane Wong, Alicia
Etup, and Marian Lozano. And was
engineered by Chris Wood.
[Music]
That's it for the Daily. I'm Natalie
Kitroof. See you tomorrow.
[Music]